Definition of Fruit:
True fruit or eucarp is a ripened ovary which develops under the influence of ripening ovules and is meant for protecting them. It consists of a pericarp formed from the wall of ovary and seeds formed from ovules.

A fruit in which other floral parts (e.g., thalamus, base of sepals, petals, etc.) fuse with the pericarp is called false fruit, accessory fruit or pseudocarp (e.g., Apple, Mulberry, and Strawberry). A fruit formed without fertilization, i.e., a seedless fruit is called parthenocarp (e.g., Banana).

Types of Fruits:
Fruits are of three main types— simple (formed from a flower having a single pistil), aggregate (from a flower having polycarpellary apocarpous gynaecium) and composite (from a whole inflorescence).



Some of the important types of fruit are listed below:

1. Simple Fruit:
A simple fruit develops from the single simple or compound ovary of a flower. It can be dry (pericarp dry) or succulent (pericarp fleshy). Dry fruits are of further three types— achenial (single seeded indehiscent), capsular (many seeded dehiscent) and schizocarpic (many seeded breaking up into single seeded parts).

I. Achenial Fruits:



They are single seeded, indehiscent, dry and simple fruits. The achenial fruits are of five kinds.

i. Typical Achene:

The thin dry pericarp is free from seed except at one point. The fruit develops from a monocarpellary pistil having superior unilocular and unioveuled ovary, e.g Four O’clock (Mirabilis jalapa), Boerhaavia. It is more common in aggregate fruit (Ranunculus, Clematis, etc.)

ii. Caryopsis or Grain:

The thin dry pericarp is completely fused with the seed coat or testa. The fruit develops from a monocarpellary pistil with superior, unilocular and uniovuled ovary, e.g., Maize, Wheat, Oat, Rice.




mirabrilis jalapa

Caryopsis of maize (Makki)


iii. Cypsela (Fig. 5.105):

Cypsela is also called inferior, false or pseudocaipic achene. The thin fruit wall (developed from pericarp and thalamus) is attached to the seed at one point but the fruit develops from an inferior, unilocular and uniovuled ovary, e.g., Sunflower Mangold. Some cypselas envelop pappus for dispersal, e.g., Sonchus, Taraxacum (Dandelion).

Cypsela


ADVERTISEMENTS:



iv. Nut (Fig. 5.106):

In this single-seeded indehiscent and dry fruit, the fruit wall is hard, woody or rarely leathery. In Cashewnut (Anacardium occidentale), the kidney-shaped fruit (formed from monocarpellary superior ovary) lies above a fleshy thalamus.

ADVERTISEMENTS:


The hard peri­carp encloses the edible seed having two large cotyledons. In Oak the hard brown pericarp is smooth. It is surrounded at the base by a cupule of bracts (The fruit develops from a tricarpellary syncarpous and inferior ovary in which only one ovule reaches maturity).

In litchi (Litchi chinensis-Nephelium litchi) the brown реriсаrp is somewhat spiny, hard but brittle. It encloses single large and brown seed (fruit develops from a tricarpellary, syncar­pous, trilocular ovary in which one ovule of one chamber reaches maturity).

In between the seed and the pericarp is found a white, transluscent, fleshy and edible structure called aril. It is considered to be additional integument of the ovule which develops from the funiculus (stalk) of the ovule.

Walnut (Juglans regia), previously considered to be a drupe, has a husk like exocarp (formed of thalamus, perianth, and bract), a woody pericarp and a single seed having convoluted edible cotyledons (fruit is formed from a bicarpellary, unilocular and umovuled inferior ovary).

Nuts

v. Simple Samara (Fig. 5.107):

The pericarp of single-seeded indehiscent dry fruit bears membranous outgrowths called wings for wind dispersel, e.g., Ulmus (Elm), Holoptelia (Indian Elm). The term samaroid is used for fruits having wings formed of other structures, e.g., sepals in Shorea (sal).

Samara of Elm and Samara of Holoptelia

II. Capsular Fruits:

They are many-seeded, dry, simple and dehiscent fruits in which the pericarp splits open to expose the seeds.