Fruit benefits according to color

 Red fruits

The importance of red fruits stems from the fact that they contain a high percentage of antioxidants, as they contain a component of Lycopene which has a very high ability to resist cancer.

It also contains a compound (resveratrol) which prevents the growth and spread of cancer cells. Examples of these fruits: tomatoes, kakas, berries, watermelon, strawberries.

Blue and violet fruitsFruits & Vegetables

 These types of fruits are not very widespread but have many benefits. They contain anthocyanins, an antioxidant that protects against cancer. Examples of these fruits include plums, figs, black and blue grapes.

Orange and yellow fruits

 These fruits contain an antioxidant (beta carotene) that protects the eye from diseases and protects the body from cancer. Examples of these fruits include: orange, lemon, melon, apricot, yellow apple, cornflakes, mangoes and bananas.

Green fruits

 Green fruits contain polyphenols resistant to cancer, heart disease, and osteoporosis. They also play a role in the prevention of neurological diseases. Examples of this type of fruit include kiwi, green grapes, green apples, avocado.

Importance of fruits essay
The importance of fruits to the body is numerous. This year, through the teacher specialized in nutritional health, we were able to learn many of the health benefits for the body that we gain when eating fruits.

And about the state of mood and health and the ability of some fruits to raise the body’s immunity. And its importance to address many of the diseases that we get as a result of the low level of immunity in the body.


And that there are different benefits for each type of fruit, and that each type affects a group of body organs more.
Like bananas, we find that it maintains an increase in energy in the body. It also reduces the chances of developing anemia, and maintains the level of blood pressure.

Contrary to what we have learned about watermelon, we find that it benefits the skin more than bananas, and that there are multiple differences between each fruit and multiple benefits.Flora & Fauna

We find that watermelon works to moisturize the skin, and it also helps to increase collagen in the body. And it contains antioxidants, which helps reduce the appearance of signs of aging.

Therefore, I find that fruits are of great importance to all people and we must learn a lot about them to know how to eat them in order to benefit from them usefully.

 

Paragraph on fruits
Fruit is very important, as it has been proven to be rich in fiber, salts and minerals important for the body. It is preferable to eat the fruit two hours after meals. Where it has been proven that this is the ideal timing for the body to respond to benefit from the nutrients in the  fruit.

One of the things I loved about fruit is that each type of fruit contains different beneficial elements. The more you know about it, the more benefits you take.
For example, red grapes contain quercetin, which helps reduce heart and circulatory problems. And eating dates before bed helps regulate blood sugar levels.

Therefore, we find that there are various differences and benefits in each type of fruit. So it’s great to take it as needed. In addition to having it to improve the mood.

